Adding support for an optional initialization strategy OLoRA (#1828)
huggingface/peft: examples/olora_finetuning/README.md

# OLoRA: Orthonormal Low Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models

## Introduction
[OLoRA](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01775) is a novel approach that leverages orthonormal low rank adaptation through QR decomposition. Unlike the default LoRA implementation, OLoRA decomposes original weights into their Q and R parts, and then uses the first r columns of Q and the first r rows of R to initialize $\mathbf{A}$ and $\mathbf{B}$, respectively. This results in significantly faster convergence, more stable training, and superior performance.

## Quick start
```python
import torch
from peft import LoraConfig, get_peft_model
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM
from trl import SFTTrainer
from datasets import load_dataset

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16, device_map="auto")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m")
dataset = load_dataset("imdb", split="train[:1%]")
lora_config = LoraConfig(
    init_lora_weights="olora"
)
peft_model = get_peft_model(model, lora_config)

> trainer = SFTTrainer(

Author: This is straight from [huggingface](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/sft_trainer#quickstart). Do you want me to add a reference?

    model=peft_model,
    train_dataset=dataset,
    dataset_text_field="text",
    max_seq_length=512,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
)
trainer.train()
peft_model.save_pretrained("olora-opt-350m")
```

## Use the model
You can load and use the model as any other 🤗 PEFT model
```python
from peft import PeftModel
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m")
olora_model = PeftModel.from_pretrained(model, "olora-opt-350m")
print(olora_model)
```
## Citation
```

> @misc{büyükakyüz2024olora,

Author: You have emojis so UTF-8 should be ok?

lora_config = LoraConfig(
    init_lora_weights="olora"
)
peft_model = get_peft_model(model, lora_config)
trainer = SFTTrainer(
    model=peft_model,
    train_dataset=dataset,
    dataset_text_field="text",
    max_seq_length=512,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
)
trainer.train()
peft_model.save_pretrained("olora-opt-350m")
```

There is no additional change needed to your standard LoRA procedure, except for specifying `init_lora_weights = "olora"` option in your lora configuration.

Additionally you can refer to olora finetuning script.
Run the script simply by running:
```bash
python3 examples/olora_finetuning/olora_finetuning.py --base_model facebook/opt-350m
```
OLoRA also supports quantization. To use 4-bit quantization try:
```bash
python3 examples/olora_finetuning/olora_finetuning.py --base_model facebook/opt-350m --quantize
```

## Use the model
You can load and use the model as any other 🤗 PEFT model
```python
from peft import PeftModel
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m")
olora_model = PeftModel.from_pretrained(model, "olora-opt-350m")
print(olora_model)
```

## OLoRA and LoRA

> Unlike LoRA, OLoRA mutates the original weights. If you want to use multiple adapters simultaneously you can use `path_initial_model_for_weight_conversion` option. First save your model that initialized by using OLoRA before performing any training:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike LoRA, OLoRA mutates the original weights. If you want to use multiple adapters simultaneously you can use `path_initial_model_for_weight_conversion` option. First save your model that was initialized with OLoRA **before** performing any training:
```

```python

> olora_model.save_pretrained(init_path)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
init_path = <path-to-untrained-olora-model>
olora_model.save_pretrained(init_path)
```

```

Then you can specify the path of the initialized adapter in the `save_pretrained` method:
```python

> from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM
> model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m")
> olora_model = get_peft_model(model, lora_config)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# after training
```

## Quick start
```python
import torch
from peft import LoraConfig, get_peft_model
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM
from trl import SFTTrainer
from datasets import load_dataset

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16, device_map="auto")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m")
dataset = load_dataset("imdb", split="train[:1%]")
lora_config = LoraConfig(
    init_lora_weights="olora"
)
peft_model = get_peft_model(model, lora_config)
trainer = SFTTrainer(
    model=peft_model,
    train_dataset=dataset,
    dataset_text_field="text",
    max_seq_length=512,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
)
trainer.train()
peft_model.save_pretrained("olora-opt-350m")
```

There is no additional change needed to your standard LoRA procedure, except for specifying `init_lora_weights = "olora"` option in your lora configuration.

> Additionally you can refer to olora finetuning script.

Reviewer: Let's mention that users need to install `fire`, which is not a PEFT dependency.

Run the script simply by running:
```bash
python3 examples/olora_finetuning/olora_finetuning.py --base_model facebook/opt-350m
```
OLoRA also supports quantization. To use 4-bit quantization try:
```bash
python3 examples/olora_finetuning/olora_finetuning.py --base_model facebook/opt-350m --quantize
```

## Use the model
You can load and use the model as any other 🤗 PEFT model
```python
from peft import PeftModel
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("facebook/opt-350m")
olora_model = PeftModel.from_pretrained(model, "olora-opt-350m")
print(olora_model)
```

## OLoRA and LoRA
Unlike LoRA, OLoRA mutates the original weights. If you want to use multiple adapters simultaneously you can use `path_initial_model_for_weight_conversion` option. First save your model that was initialized with OLoRA **before** performing any training:
```python
init_path = <path-to-untrained-olora-model>
olora_model.save_pretrained(init_path)
```

> # After training

Reviewer: You added `# After training` as a new section, but my intent was to add it below where my comment was, above the `olora_model.save_pretrained` call. The reason is to clarify to the user that the order is:

1. Load the base model and apply OLoRA
2. Save initial model with `init_path`
3. Train the model
4. Save the final model with `path_initial_model_for_weight_conversion=init_path`

Let's try to make this super clear. If you have different proposal to achieve this, feel free to do that.
